So there's this trade-off, and I think a lot of times you don't consider your water source
as a really, yeah, water is a source of inconsistency in terms of when you're having the result
that you're trying to get and you're having trouble getting that result.
Water is, for me, one of the first places to look, to say where's my water coming from,
has my water changed, is there some contamination in my water, what's going on?
what's going on. It's like a clue.
Another source of inconsistency is hygiene. It's just not cleaning our tanks. I don't see this enough.
I don't see people getting in their tanks, scrubbing with a hydro washer and brushes.
This cleanliness is very rare in our coffee industry. One, we talked a little bit about in Colombia,
Colombia, there's almost no downtime. If you're just constantly processing, there's no downtime to stop and give everything a good scrub.
But even then, we're so used to thinking of coffee as like, "Oh, it's gonna be roasted."
So there's no pathogens in it, so you don't treat it in the same
category as food.
This is something that we're gonna be eating.
So if you walk into any winery, any brewery, dairies are some of the cleanest places that you'll ever be because they know
contamination has a negative impact on our flavor.
And then with coffee, we really have made this connection
of lower flavor, lower quality with unclean facilities.
Sort of like, oh, we've always done it this way,
coffee gets roasted, it's fine.
So I think that's one of the biggest leverage points
for facilities to improve their quality is just cleaning.
It's just having a hydro washer
and paying some attention to sanitizing.
Not, like I mentioned, I'm not a huge fan of sanitizing
cherry, sanitizing with fruit, I don't think that's necessary
but I definitely want you to clean your tanks
and sanitize your tanks and the pulpers
and kind of everything else.
So there's like, you know, a bit of a balance
with all the things that we've talked about.
This is also like what I love,
I think the pressure washer is like a really good
basic thing for most mills to have,
cleaning with water can go a long way, cleaning with pressurized water can go a long way.
Neutral detergents, it's really hard in Latin countries.
We just have this culture of everything that's soap or laundry detergent or anything has a really strong fragrance.
Everything has a really strong fragrance.
I mean, but this is like, really easy going away.
I mean, you want to make your coffee taste a bit like citrusy.
Like lemon lime, citrusy.
Lavender flowers. It's very easy.
You can mix it a bit
We bought some like tissues like Kleenex like facial tissues, and they don't have any like
Advertisement that they're scented and when we open the package like Nick and I like
Like a sneezing thing because they're so strongly scented and I'm like nowhere does it say they're scented like the default
Is you like there's no unscented like the default is you will have a really strong scent
So, soaps can be a little bit of a difficulty in Latin countries.
But what I like to tell producers is if you have a brewery near you, if you have a distillery,
if you have a dairy, they're cleaning their facility, they're cleaning their tanks,
they're cleaning their equipment. Ask what they use and see if you can buy some of what they're using.
I also like alcohol as like to be cleaning our instruments when we're checking our
perceptions, white vinegar.
So we don't have to get so intense, we don't have to get so extreme, but just starting
kind of that path of cleanliness and sanitization is recommended.
Another thing I get asked about frequently is the material of my tank.
How does my material impact my fermentation?
So you can see that the traditional tau kwe tanks are very porous.
They're difficult to clean.
And-- are you OK?
And so a lot of times, yes, these are very--
I don't know, traditional, maybe outdated.
I think a lot of producers want to upgrade their equipment
and the first place they think of is a tank.
I'm going to get shiny stainless steel tank.
And this can be a really good first step
because the smoother the surface,
the easier it is to clean.
But what I've seen and the mistake that I've seen
is that we get new tanks,
but we haven't like upgraded our mentality.
We haven't upgraded our culture of cleaning.
So they buy brand new tanks and just treat them the same
as the old concrete tanks that never really get rinsed or washed.
So I would rather have a concrete tank that you clean than a stainless steel one that you never clean.
And along those lines, this can be an expensive upgrade.
So again, I'm still a big fan of plastic.
I think plastic is a perfectly reasonable material, plastic bags.
It has a smooth surface and the portability,
being able to pick up a tank and move it towards the sun,
pick it up and put it in the shade or get more of them.
Like that flexibility is not as beautiful.
It's not as Instagramable, but it's a lot more functional
to have multiple of these tanks.
'Cause that's another problem.
A lot of the times producers have trouble
doing experiments 'cause they have like one giant tank
or two giant tanks instead of having 20 different
barrels or something else that they can do trials in.
So that's a little bit difficult.
Before-- with producers, before they go to full upgrade
to metal, or if plastic is too small,
if they need to still do big batches,
I do like the method of just tiling your tanks,
just reducing your surface area.
A tiled tank can sometimes be a much better investment
than a stainless steel tank.
Also, the way with how coffee's working, being a solid,
Those tanks work really well for liquids,
but when you have a solid that you have
like these much smaller holes,
those tanks can be much harder to clean
because you're not dealing with a liquid medium.
So not only do I want you to clean your tanks,
but I want you to clean everything that touches the coffee.
So we didn't have too much of an upgrade here
by going to a plastic tank
and then stirring it with a wooden paddle
because our wood is not able, it's very porous,
and we're not able to clean it.
So a lot of times we're just like thinking about the tank,
but we're not thinking about everything else
that's touching the coffee, the paddles,
and like I mentioned, our hands,
everything that we're going into.
Every opportunity, every opening is a chance
to contaminate your coffee, which again,
just means it's gonna make it hard to reproduce.
Doesn't mean like you're gonna have terrible results.
Just means, I don't know if I can hit that target
like bullseye every time.
So this is another example, it's a plastic barrel,
food grade barrel, and then it's got a metal paddle,
it's a metal stirrer, which is much easier to clean
than wood.
And a lot of the times, okay, maybe we clean our tank
and we have our great paddles,
but we're still not cleaning our surfaces.
So this is another mill in Peru.
They have the hydro washer, the pressure washer.
We clean the tank very well, and it's tiled, it's great.
But the floor and the walls were very muddy, and so it started to rain, everything was open, and all that mud you can see here went into the fermentation.
So all of this mud just swept in. So a lot of the times we're really not thinking broadly enough about our cleaning facilities.
So even when I get to some producers, I'm like, "I clean the tank!" But everything else is still... needs some attention.
And everything that touches the coffee.
All the little critters that have coffee unprotected, all of the birds, and potentially the cats,
and the moths, and the butterflies, all of these insects are inoculating your fermentation
with their own microbes, with their own yeast that they have on their surfaces.
And again, it's just a source of inconsistency.
It just means maybe that lizard brings the best yeast, but can you trust that lizard to come every time?
Will it always be there?
Are you ready for the next season?
Yeah.
Get that, get him on contract.
So I think because we're just so used to coffee being, I don't know, I see so many people putting up pictures of like coffee dogs and cats on patios and it looks really cute,
We're just not used to respecting coffee as a food.
And it's just so common how often we show something that would anywhere else would be really gross.
But with coffee, it's like, plaint!
And romantic!
What's up?
Yeah, if you get nothing else from this, get some lizards.
Actually this guy I think was from my time in Hawaii.
Do you recognize?
Yeah, those are fake echoes.
It's yours, your employee.
I've seen the one on the left in the bag of green coffee.
Oh, Carolina.
It went all the way to the green coffee, but yeah, it was dried out.
Well, yeah.
But yeah.
Same as that.
Burn and work.
Huh?
Yeah.
So is that a part of coffee free business?
[LAUGHTER]
Sorry, a little bit of umami.
A little earthy.
So we've talked about this a little bit already,
about why I cover the fermentations.
So covering it is homogenizing the environment
and also preventing any potential contamination.
So whether we have the big tanks, and like I said,
covering it on the surface is a little bit more effective
than just putting a lid on top.
And in this situation, with all of these plastic barrels,
they each had their own little plastic lid.
So it depends how much effort you want to do.
If you want to do small batches or have the opportunity
to do those larger batches.
But even still, covering every single one is just a good idea.
Just safe practices.
So this is another idea of our scale really
impacts our results.
The same way in roasting, what you do for a sample roast with 50 grams is not what you
do for a 200 kilo batch or a 500 kilo batch.
The size of your sample is really going to affect the kinetics.
How much heat it takes up, how much energy is needed to transform it.
This is also true for our fermentations.
So the biggest mistake I see producers making is they do a bucket trial, they love it, and
They say, now I need five tons of this.
And they apply the same rules to the bigger fermentation.
And it doesn't translate.
Our sample roast doesn't translate
to our full-size roast.
And our bucket trials don't translate
to our big fermentations.
So a lot of times for me, bucket trials
are not super useful if my goal is to do big fermentations.
So when I work with clients, I'm like,
what is the final size you want to make?
And we start with that.
And because I know that I'm not going to ruin their coffee,
I know what to look for, we can get away with it.
Our trial is 10 tons.
Our trial is the size that you're
going to do so that we can replicate those results.
And the other reason why we really
can't replicate a bucket to our full-scale tank
has a lot to do with the geometry
and the configuration of these tanks.
[DOG BARKING]
Oh, dog.
[INAUDIBLE]
So if we look at the shape of this,
like our surface area is very small and our volume is large.
There's a lot of coffee that is in one environment compared
to the thin surface area on top.
Compared to a traditional coffee tank,
there's a swimming pool that has a huge surface area and very
little volume.
So in this case, that whatever 10%, 5% of the coffee
is in a slightly different environment.
Maybe it's a little drier, maybe it's a little warmer,
but most of my coffee is in a very similar environment.
In my super big tank, when I have all of the surface area,
then a lot of my coffee is very different
from the rest of the coffee.
There's a lot more difference
between all of this coffee surface
and whatever is underneath whether it's temperature,
the bottom is more moist, the top is more dried out.
There's a lot more inconsistency in this geometry.
And the other thing, especially with these tanks
that are open and exposed,
then, I mean, you can see where that guy's standing.
It starts to rain, and then it starts to rain into my tank,
and then it starts to get more wet,
or it starts to, a cloud comes in,
and I get a lot more humidity.
Or conversely, I get a lot more wind,
and so I'm drying out the surface of my coffee,
Or the sun, we saw another one where the sun was shining on one of the other surfaces,
so it starts to heat up a lot more on top and underneath.
So this tank is not ideal for consistent batches of coffee.
And a lot of the times that's also why we can't translate one thing to the other.
So when you're going from, "Okay, I did a bucket trial, and now I need to make it bigger,"
So, I think, think about how you can replicate some of the environment, some of what that
small batch experience on a larger scale.
Don't just think about, now I just add volume and add more yeast and add more water.
But sometimes we do have to do bucket trials.
So, I was in Brazil two harvests in a row, and this producer wanted to try, he had, he
like 10 different yeasts that he wanted to try and he was making new, he was growing
new varieties. He had some Bobata, he had some Ubonobo, and he just had some others
that he hadn't tried before. So he really wanted to do a lot of permutations. We did
like 22. We couldn't do 22 big tins because we didn't have that much cherry and we didn't
have that much time. So sometimes you have to do bucket trials. So the first year we
did a whole bunch of different bucket trials of different varieties mixed with, so we take
one variety with five yeast, and then another variety
with the five yeast, and then another variety with the five
yeast to see which one behaved better,
which one was a better pairing.
And once we found that size--
or sorry, once we found that match that we liked,
say we liked sima with obata, or we like intensa with mugunoko,
whatever it was, then we did have to scale it.
So using my parameters, using our curves,
and say, how do we make it similar?
You're able to take that small bucket
and get to the very large size.
So this gentleman is standing on a bucket inside of the tank.
So that is actually another, however deep.
That is, it's a good amount of coffee.
And following our curve, following our parameters,
first this happened, and then we had this interchange.
And you were able to replicate small buckets
onto the big scale.
So it's definitely possible.
It's just not as direct a translation.
So you can do it.
Again, by following the behavior,
following how it behaved with the little bucket
and how I can make it bigger.
Do you have any results?
How did you target it?
I mean, like, were you being very inconsistent
with the new results?
Or do you have the biggest impact?
Because I guess you could have different styles of normal mutations
with what is, so like a very small,
more powerful, bigger, bigger, bigger,
similar or different?
Um, it's a good question.
They were, it's sort of like,
it was close enough that it still gave a good result.
So, it was also about being flexible, like,
maybe there was this particular profile,
and we didn't exactly match that profile,
but we got good results that we could sort of move forward.
So at that point it wasn't necessarily matching the exact results,
it was about just doing it well.
Pairing.
Pairing, yeah. Sort of like...
If you have to work with big tanks, like something like this,
so basically I think the biggest thing that you want to play with,
or you push to play with, is the temperature.
Us playing with water, so adding more cold water or adding more warm water is the best way to...
That is the easiest. Temperature is the easiest lever to pull.
And heating up water to try and match a smaller...
Or cooling water and adding cold water to the fermentation is the easiest lever to pull.
But do we not put it in the concentrations or something like that?
No, because it's still the same amount of water, just the temperature of the water is different.
No, but we... Why it's still the same?
Because we have the tank with the cherries and with some more water just to make it homogeneous.
And then we dump a bit extra water inside, like cold water to either...
No, so I wouldn't start with water and add cold or hot water.
I would first heat or cool my water and add that water to my cherries.
So I wouldn't add any extra water.
You mean you take something out of the tank?
No, I would start with the water and the temperature that I want.
So let's say it's really cold, and I did do this in Brazil at a different place.
So it was a pretty cool environment.
And the client didn't...
He just bought yeast that he thought sounded interesting.
I looked at the instructions of the yeast and said it is a red wine yeast that needs to be at like 27
but our environment was at like 10 celsius. So we built up the yeast and then it was in the like
you know those water cubes the one that I showed that's how I said it was one of these.
So we had one of these tanks and I first we pulped the coffee into it and then we warmed up water we
heated water to like 25 and then added the water at 25 to this tank to the submerged level.
And because the fermentation is so vigorous it was able to maintain that temperature for the
rest of the time but if I had just added water it would have been at 10 and it may have never
taken off. So at that point I don't touch it again. I don't add more water or take out more
water or do anything. My first one yeah because then you would be diluting. It's just my first
introduction is with warm water. Yeah, but my question is when you started it, for example,
a day later, would you see that it's like really drastically went down the temperature?
How can you play around with the big volume, like big tanks?
It's really hard because what we did in Brazil was we did it with the warm water,
but the night was so cold and it was outside so then what we did is you can see this has wheels
or like a forklift so then we physically moved the tank into the sun we warmed it up a little
bit and then we brought it inside so that it could ferment inside instead of being outside
exposed so when you have a concrete tank you have a lot more difficulties
[ Inaudible ]
>> Exactly.
I'd rather not.
So if we have this, when we have these tanks,
I know that this can fit like 600, 700 kilos.
And that's the batch that I want to get.
If for some reason I only have 200 kilos,
I use a different tank.
And then fill that up to the maximum.
So I would rather change my vessel and fill it up
than to have one vessel and just keep changing.
Because every time you change the volume,
you're changing that surface area to volume ratio.
So I would rather have a variety of tanks.
So this one is only for 600 and above.
If I have 400 or less, I have a different tank.
I have the black one.
If I have less, I have the red one.
Sometimes I think for babies, right,
it's even more, even more important to have a good volume for the--
Yes.
--the population and--
Exactly.
Yes.
That's really important.
And that's one of the things that Alejandra brought up.
She makes really good coffee.
She has really good practices.
One of the things that she just knew to do
is always fill the tank to the same level.
And if she can't fill that level,
she uses a different tank.
And I think that a lot of producers
have variability for that because they just,
they have one tank and then whatever comes in
goes in that tank.
Whether it's 100 kilos or 1,000 kilos,
they use the same tank.
And the coffee turns out very differently.
So plastic was your hat.
And it's not.
[CRASHING]
[LAUGHTER]
Running start.
So yeah, so tank material is important,
but also how much you fill your tank
goes a long way into consistency.
So this is just following the behavior.
If I want to translate it-- yeah, Sasan?
So if I remember, the first time you see, it was 5 gallon buckets.
It was 5 gallon buckets.
And that took 30 kg, which is one unit of 4 buckets.
So if I did one unit or 10 units, they would all be full to the brim.
Now that I switched to the blue drum, I cut that in half.
Sometimes it's only 3/4 of the way.
So should I get more drums and maybe make different layers,
One for five boxes, one for ten boxes.
That's what I would like.
Rather than more buckets?
I like larger units to that point.
So like not so large that it's ten tons in like a concrete tank.
But for you, the bigger you can make it,
so I would rather you have one drum than three buckets.
With different heights, yes.
Yeah.
Because again, the more kind of a unit you have,
As much as a cylinder or cube, you can make your fermentations, I think that geometry is really good.
And the bigger it is, if you can have one that's 60 kilos instead of 230, you will have more mass, you'll have more energy.
I just like that better.
And you're only monitoring one fermentation instead of taking two cages at two temperatures and making sure they match.
Like if you can just consolidate it to 160 or even 190 instead of having buckets, it'll be easier.
Only if you have enough coffee to fill the truck, otherwise you go back to your buckets.
The limit I would say is whatever you can mix. So that, the thing that I showed with Sebas,
This guy, this is, he can do 700 kilos of colt coffee, so over a ton of cherry. 700 kilos of colt coffee in here.
And Cebaz is strong enough and tall enough that he can still mix this entire unit.
So I would rather him mix one 700 kilo unit than have three barrels and be monitoring three different permutations.
But if this is so big that it is really hard, like I couldn't mix that by myself. He can.
So I would do, if I was by myself and I had nobody to help me, I would do two barrels that I could mix really well and split it into two presentations.
This might also be relevant to your experiment setup.
Yeah, super cool.
So this is just my little shorthand that's in your books of like what I like to measure.
In my environment, I like to get ambient temperature and relative humidity.
Kind of for what we saw before where if you have coffee exposed, which we're not going to anymore,
but if you do or you don't have plastic, you know your relative humidity.
Was it a really wet day? Was it windy? Was it dry?
For the cherries, I like to measure the color.
obviously what percentage is in my range, like what percentage is in my acceptable range.
So when I'm cupping my coffee at the end and I like some attributes, I want to be able to go back and say,
"Wow, this day we had 85% of our cherries in an acceptable range compared to this coffee that's like,
"Oh, and it was at 60%." So maybe that will guide my, but again, that's like a decision you make later.
So, I'm going to measure my pH.
I'm going to measure my pH.
I'm going to measure my water.
This is whole coffee, so this would be in the fermentation.
My delta, I don't necessarily look at a starting brix or an ending brix.
I look at my delta. How did it change?
So that was before. Like what path did it take?
Did I go fast? Did I go slow? Like how much?
I look at my curve.
And the same is true for my brix.
I don't really care. I don't have a target.
I don't want to like always get to 10 brix or always 8, anything like that.
What I care about is how did it change?
What's my delta?
And then I look at my time and my temperature.
What rivers?
And then obviously moisture content.
We want to know for our green coffee and if you can
water activity.
Exporters do it. Some roasters
have the machine. Importers do it as well.
Producers are able
to measure their water activity
because it's a very expensive
machine, but I think it's technology that's better.
We're going to be coming out with cheaper models.
And we'll talk more about what I'm going to do.
So what is your deal on the change, you know, on the delta?
Like, to get fast, slowly?
To know what it is. Again, nothing is good or bad. Nothing is ever good or bad.
It's just, can I get it again?
Just know what it is and try at the end and see.
know what it is and try at the end and then your flavor will say I liked it or
I didn't like it and then you can know I can avoid this curve in the future or I
want to replicate. So now it is for repetitively? Yeah.
So it's not for getting the best flavor or for avoiding a bad flavor it's just
saying wow I hit the bullseye and I want to hit it again what can I do?
that are monitoring how you can prepare these to a roasting court.
Yes. Exactly.
So this is just a reminder, or I think some people still have this idea,
we talked about it earlier, that what matters is the variety and the roasting.
That these two things are where the flavor comes from,
and then processing is either something painted on top or something extra,
So this is just a reminder that all of these things matter.
The variety absolutely matters.
The processing influences the flavor and the roasting matters as well.
All of these things combine to give you the whole picture.
And what we were sort of talking about sugar earlier, that most of our seed is 50% carbohydrates.
It's too often we use sugar and carbohydrates interchangeably.
That makes it kind of confusing.
We should be talking about carbohydrates and sugar.
And so we're going to be talking about carbohydrates and sugar.
And what we were sort of talking about sugar earlier,
that most of our seed is 50% carbohydrates.
It's too often we sugar and carbohydrates
like interchangeably, that makes it kind of confusing.
Like we should be talking about carbohydrates
as like carbon building blocks.
The thing that I think is interesting
in where I pulled some of these numbers
is that the sucrose is three to 8%,
which seems like a small amount,
Meaning that in different varieties,
the sucrose content can vary from three to 8%.
But that's actually a lot.
Like the fact that some varieties have three
and some have eight,
like some varieties genetically have
almost three times more sucrose available.
And so if you have one of those,
compared to one that's much lower,
your processing is only gonna go so far.
There's a limit to how much your processing
might compensate for a lower, I don't want to say bad, but just for like a lower for a different
you know quantity of sucrose. So genetics definitely, your plant genetics really matter
with your flavor. And then other way around as well you can go if you for example calibrate your
recipe is about 3% sucrose coffee and we use the population of 8%
so we're basically speeding up the process
adding more material to be involved
I don't know if it works
Don't you think that it can just go further than for example
if you calibrate it on food
Well, I think this is where we're getting two things confused
because I'm talking about what's in the seed
kind of like what's found inside
And when we're doing our fermentation, it's just the mucilage on the outside.
So it's not that one variety has three times more sucrose available in the mucilage,
and therefore the fermentation would be like faster.
I'm talking about like the sucrose that's in the seed that we don't have readily available.
We don't have that like immediate access to in our fermentation.
It's just the genetics of the fruit.
Yeah?
Can you touch on the flavor of cherries from the tree?
It seems to be somewhat sweet and somewhat not so nice.
Some are sweet and some are not as sweet.
And the other thing that's really helpful about this study that we're going to talk about next
is that there are some flavor precursors that they find in green coffee that survive roasting,
that don't get transformed, that don't get chemically changed.
It's the same compound in the green seed as it is in the roasted coffee.
So there is some evidence that when you taste the geisha cherry,
when you taste those flavors that are like peachy or...
Yeah, that those same flavors survive in after the roasting process.
But it's, I think it's so kind of far or it's hard to say that the flavors that we taste in the fruit
are going to end up in the ground.
Some of them will, but because coffee is so transformed
in its processing and its roasting,
it's really hard to know how much is going to survive
and how much will be transformed.
So one of the kind of, what's it called,
topics that we were talking about before
is the concept of just having more stuff.
If you have more stuff,
then you either have more stuff to play with
or more stuff to lose.
And so in our fermentation, when we're getting more stuff
and we're creating more compounds,
it gives you more of that opportunity to age your coffee,
age more gracefully, or more material
to potentially transform during the roasting
to make a more complex coffee.
So it's just like having more building material.
It's like I have three trucks of lumber and nails
and I'm gonna do something with it,
versus I just have like a wagon full of like
some wood and some nails.
Like, I can make more things.
Doesn't mean I will, I just can.
Potential.
Yeah.
More potential.
Exactly.
So this is just a study that really reinforces, like, sometimes we're like, we don't know what's true,
and we don't know what's anecdotal, and it is true that in the fermentation, we make precursors,
we know they get into the seed, we know that they can change our flavor.
What we don't know very well is how, like the mechanisms, the transport mechanism of how these
compounds get into the seed is still up for debate, but they can find them. They test the green coffee,
they find the signature, they taste the roasted coffee, they find the signature,
and we know this happens. There's still more work to be done on how this happens.
So really quickly to touch on drying.
These are just two
two pictures of the same patio in Parma del Salvador.
And so it has a more
more traditional kind of surface like the clay tiles that get very hot.
So in order to try to improve their processing, they put these raised beds
for to get more airflow, to get the cherries off of that really, really hot surface.
And you can see that some of the top ones are shading the bottom ones.
So it's just an effort to improve quality by reducing the temperature.
And I think this is a really, really overlooked part of coffee.
I think so often we want to improve quality with fermentation,
when you can keep your fermentation the same and just improve your drying
and get much more like return, like much more bang for your buck on better drying.
Because drying is a place where you can really destroy a lot of the good work that you've done
before with too fast and too hot drying. What you do in the tank, I mean the whole point is that they
are delicate complex volatiles that are going to delight you. So if you do a really hot fast drying
and you're eliminating those volatiles.
You're heating them up and they're escaping.
So yes, we do work on fermentation,
but drying is really often the key to higher quality.
And just lowering your temperature,
being more gentle, backing off, can go a long way
towards quality.
So another thing that I think a lot of times
we don't really realize is we think, OK, I've done my job.
the fermentation's over, the coffee's drying, it's fine.
Not realizing that, okay, the microbial charge
is still there, the microbes are still,
especially on a natural, the microbes are still there.
If you've got humidity, if you've got like humidity
plus time, you've got a risk of some change.
So the more time you have, or the more humidity you have,
the more opportunity for the coffee to change,
to be different.
And again, it's not that it's gonna be worse,
that it's going to be hard to hit that target and promise your customer I can do this again.
I'm like, I don't know if I can. I don't know what happened during that drying.
So what we really want to do is, the thing that they used to say about fermentation is
you can't improve a coffee, all you can do is ruin it. I don't think that's true of fermentation,
but right now, and I can probably eat my words and like whenever there's new research, but for now,
I think drying really is that point where we can't necessarily improve a coffee. We're just preserving or ruining it.
So not true fermentation, but definitely true drying.
Until proven otherwise.
We definitely want to be slow enough to be gentle.
So we like I said we want what we were doing in this example of getting the coffee off of the ground, more airflow,
having this metal structure on top so they can put shade and protect it from the heat.
But I think there is a thing it's too slow, too gentle. Having extended moisture contact
is what we've seen in some other pictures of fungal growth. We can definitely
invite other microbes to the party. These are sort of the goals when I think about drying.
What are the guidelines? So here is an example of coffee at 40 Celsius. You can see the
cellular structure still stays intact and 60 that structure has been burst so
that the integrity is no longer there so high temperature definitely destroys
structure we know that this is true it's not an opinion the opinion is kind of
how much is too slow and how much is too fast my opinion is that in less than six
I've seen it's very difficult to dry a coffee in like five days in a gentle way. I feel like if you're drying in five days, you're probably using too much heat. You're probably going too fast.
And then on the other side, I don't think that we need to extend the fermentation so long. I don't think that 25 days, like, I was in, in Rwanda, and they were purposely building, let me have a picture of it,
These large structures, so that they can dry their coffee completely outside of any UV
contact, completely in the shade, so that they can extend it to five weeks.
And, just sort of like, I mean their quality was great, but I felt like they could have
gotten really great quality in maybe three weeks.
I don't think they need to wait for five.
What do you think about the combination of drying and storing and drying?
I think that's really key. I think that's really important, which is why I think
you know less than six days is too slow because it doesn't give you the chance
to dry rest, dry rest. I think that cycle is really important for quality.
What do you think about mechanical dryers?
Love them. I love them so much. There's a whole section on mechanical dryers. Big fan.
So this is just to show you that there are guidelines like there is too hot,
And then we're just bursting the cells and releasing the contents, then we're not going
to be able to proceed them in the cup.
And I can't tell you how many times we go through the effort of doing a fermentation,
do the trial, and then no one pays attention to the drying.
It was like forgotten or just went too quick.
And they're like, "You dried it at 60 in three days!"
Because they were so excited to try the trial.
They dried the coffee really fast
so that they could taste the results
and kind of ruined the experiment.
- When there's someone who, above us,
kind of at higher altitude,
commenced washing, brings it down,
and puts it on a tennis court in Houston.
- Like on a dark--
- On a dark, green tennis court.
(laughing)
It's like cooking.
- Yeah, pre-roasting.
- Pre-roasting.
This is another example of the same. This one is 40 and this one is 60.
And you can see in the 40, like the oils are preserved.
And then on the 60, the structure has burst. The oils are exposed to oxygen.
And that's when the coffee is granted, you know, starting to fade quality.
Your coffee is so neat.
Wary of your temperature is when we're drying.
So this is my client. He's one of my like star pupils. I adore him. If you listen to the podcast, Rolando is the one who was getting the feedback that he had the fishy smell, the fishy aroma in his coffee.
And I just couldn't figure out why it was fishy. I went to his mill like three times. This is the first time. I've been there three times.
But it was because before he bought the mill, they were raising fish. It was a fish farm.
So they used the giant tanks to contain fish for like decades.
And then he bought it, fermented his coffee in there.
Like not knowing what the previous history was.
He was like, "Oh, this mill is for sale."
And then he was starting to ask around, like the history of the mill,
and they told him, "Oh, there used to be a fish farm."
So he's somebody who was previously selling all of his coffee commercially to the El Salvador
commodity market and was really interested in changing into specialty.
And so when I met him, his ratio was like 80/20.
80% of his coffee was commercial and 20% of it was good enough to sell to specialty,
which is like, basically, like highly sorting coffee,
you can kind of like push it in that direction.
So after he, like I said, he implemented better drying,
he's the one who had the 20,
actually he bought 100 plastic barrels
and was doing like all of these small fermentations,
taking his time, and he was able to flip that ratio
to 80% of his coffee is now specialty,
and 20% of it he just sells on the commodities market.
But he did a lot of work over many years,
But he got it. He's like, no, I want to do this. This is Rolando again. He does a lot of coffee. It's volume coffee. He's got a lot of space. But something really simple to lower his temperature is just putting on a shank cloth and being able to pull it out and retract it and just make sure that his temperature wasn't going above 40.
What do you think about walking on the parchment and the friction between the two?
I don't love walking on the parchment. I've seen much worse in Guatemala.
They have to move it like full tractors, just like driving over the coffee.
So it's not my favorite practice, but at some point it's like that diminishing return.
It would be so difficult not to do it this way.
But I'm okay with it.
I saw even motorbikes.
Motorbikes?
Yeah.
Yeah, the coffee does get beat up a lot.
So something like this.
So you think about the weight of a human man walking on the coffee.
But then you also have something like a, I don't know, 80 quintal guaviola.
and the weight of that much coffee
kind of continually smashing on that.
So it's hard to be gentle,
and it is something I definitely try to think about.
- But what about contamination on the boots?
- Definitely.
Contamination on the boots, I think it's,
I definitely wish you weren't walking on top of it.
But the drier it gets, the less opportunity.
But there's always there, it's always there, yeah.
- When you go to commercial factories,
I think that's good practices and that's a good idea.
It's a good thing to adopt.
This, I don't know why it didn't come out.
So this, you know, like two methods.
I use my temperature gun and I like to get the surface.
that got cut off. So two things, using the temperature gun like we did for during COVID
for all of our skin, just the surface, seeing like what is the surface of my coffee and then
that same thermometer kind of getting like the bed the pile and the temperature of the bed pile
and then also the surface and then again my ambient temperature. I want to see kind of that difference.
This is a picture of a totally different client in Atsawaro
who, they built this warehouse
and you see all of these, the wood was going to be their pallets
and it was so hot it melted, those are melted fans
because they put all of the corrugated metal
and this is where they were storing their coffee
it was so hot it melted their fans
but again, like so often we don't think about
And so, we're like, "Oh, the coffee's dry, it's in there, it's fine."
We don't think about the pressure that it's under.
So, they don't do this anymore.
[laughter]
>> Also done under?
>> No.
>> Okay.
[laughter]
>> Yeah, that's pretty wild.
>> And then you are, "Mm, one nice cookie day's pay-free."
>> Yeah.
[laughter]
>> Exactly.
And so, this is my point where they thought, "Oh, our coffee is plain, boring.
We need to fix the fermentation."
And this is why I don't do that much virtual consulting anymore,
because they don't know that this is a problem.
I need to go there and I need to look at your facility,
and then this is a much easier thing to fix than your fermentation.
My fermentation went fine.
And they thought, "Oh, our coffee's just plain and boring. We need to spice it up."
Or you just don't--
That's what's in it.
Yeah.
Or just don't try it here.
Yeah. Okay. So that's what we got with the last group.
So the rest of this, mechanical drying and then water activity and DNA cycles, we'll
talk about tomorrow.
No, no, no, no, it's like...
The room where we put the genetor, after a while you notice, because it's so much water and moisture,
I'm sure those colours weren't what I painted, I mean you realise the room is completely mouldy.
Yeah, we have that problem here.
You have to run and power wash the ceiling, the walls, the tanks, everything.
And it's something I have to do regularly.
Well, something you might be able to do is because the pulping stuff is such a high humidity,
water, yeah, such a water consuming stuff, is try to separate those out.
Because you pulp where you ferment.
So if you could pulp maybe outside where there's way more ventilation.
Have some place that's more ventilated where you have all the water activities
and then ferment in your closed room where you have the lower, so.
For sure.
Yeah.
Because you're going to get a gas pump.
So that's the outside. Both of them.
Perfect.
But more, you'd be surprised how it creeps up on you.
Oh, no I wouldn't. I would not be surprised.
Here, I mean, even just, you know, in the mill that we were working with here,
it was just constant on the roof.
And the other thing was building something that is like visually or aesthetically interesting,
seeing like high ceiling, whatever, it's so difficult to clean because it was so hard to get out there.
So a lot of times we don't have that design, that practicality in mind when we're designing.
I'm trying to clean myself. I use bleach with ammonia.
And then you wonder why you don't use pepper.
You wonder why your lungs hurt.
Yeah.
Yeah, about this, we have another 10 pages of presentation
and I did the choice.
So,
[BLANK_AUDIO]